# SCTR 65

## Lex Orandi, Lex Credendi
"The law of prayer is the law of belief."

## Neoplatonism

## Christology
* Long standing question of Jesus' status as human or divine? If he were
  fully human, how could he be divine? Also, how does Jesus bring about
  salvation?
* Early discussion by Origen in the 3rd century.
* Some councils involved:
  * Nicea (325)
    * The first ecumenical council. 220 bishps attended.
    <!-- * Hypostasis (person).-->
    * Creed said that the Father and the Son were of the same substance
      (ousios). The idea of ousios was still ambiguous. Politically,
      this worked out because Constantine got everyone to agree.
      Theologically, the disagreement was more complicated.
  * Ephesus I (431)
    * Called in opposition to Nestorius by Theodosius.
      * Nestorius preached that Christ had separate human and divine
        natures.
      * Also, Jesus could sin, hypothetically, but did not.
    * Agreed to call Mary the *theotokos* (God bearer) over Nestorius'
      word of *christotokos*. The argument was that Nestorius' word
      didn't make Jesus unique.
  * Chalcedon (451)
    * Repudiated the idea that Christ only had one nature.
    * Hypostatic union.
    * 2 natures in 1 person. "Full humanity, full divinity".
    * 4 negations: unconfused, unchangable, indivisible, inseperable.

## Trinitology
Was the Logos-Son eternal or was he created? Originally started as a
dispute between Alexander and Arius
* The term was first used by Tertullian.
  * Three persons, one substance. First taken as heresy because he
    developed the doctrine as a Montanist but later accepted.
* Heresy:
  * Modalism: 3 modes of 1 hypostasis.
* Arianism:
  * 4th century.
  * Son is subordinate to the father.
  * 3 hypostases, heteroousios.
  * "There was once when the son of God was not"
  * In response, Alexander, the Bishop of Alexandria, convened a council
    to condemn Arianism:
    * Council of Nicea
    * "Begotten not made"
    * Officially declared Arianism a heresy.
* Cappadocian Fathers: 3 hypostases, 1 ousia (being).
  * Basil of Caeseria: relationship between trinity is similar to that
    between humans and humanity.
* Constantine proposed homoiousios (like substance) but was turned down.
* Overemphasis:
  * Oneness:
    * Irenaeus: Goodness of God, unifies the 3 people.
      * Against gnostic subdivision of God.
    * Arius: Jesus is not consubstantial, is the highest of all
      creatures.
  * Plurality:
    * Tertulian
    * Origen
      * Creates inferior, subgods.
      * God created a spirit world before the actual world.
